+++
title = "eBPF for SSL packet inspections"
tags  = "ebpf"
date  = 2024-07-07T11:30:00+03:00
draft = false

description = "..."
+++

In retrospect, my task was to intercept HTTP traffic sent by various processes
using encryption with OpenSSL. The main points of this task, which were related
to eBPF, included:

* eBPF uprobes for SSL_* functions (to obtain data that was sent/recived)
* eBPF kprobes for tcp_sendmsg/tcp_recvmsg (to obtain src/dst hosts/ports)
* a lot of tracepoints (primarily to map fd)

## Setting development environment

I'm using WSL2 with arch on windows platform, so we're having env problems :D
First take was clion - but, sadly, I've failed to set up make projets >_<

Second take was with vim - `github/copilot.vim`+`ycm-core/YouCompleteMe` works
just fine (except `.h` files were interpreted as `c++` files and large
`vmlinux.h` processing was exceptionally slow, freezing vim for forever).
As a possible workaround `vmlinux_part.h` was created, with a lot of parts
to be deleted. Not convenient :(

Third take was with Sublime as editor - `c lsp plugin` failed to use clangd
(some extended problems with host-vm :) ), but LSP-copilot works. 50/50
usability!

## File structure

```console
$ tree
├── TODO.md
├── include
│   ├── bpf_endian.h
│   ├── bpf_helper_defs.h
│   ├── bpf_helpers.h
│   ├── bpf_tracing.h
│   ├── counter.h
│   ├── directions.h
│   ├── helpers.h
│   ├── logger.h
│   ├── pid_checker.h
│   ├── structures.h
│   └── vmlinux.h
├── kprobe.c
├── makefile
├── module.c
├── nodemon.json
├── openssl-args.c
├── openssl-stats.c
├── openssl-store.c
├── openssl.c
├── prepare-env.py
└── tracepoint.c
```

so what's in include directories?

* `vmlinux.h` - contains all linux kernel definitions (types, structures, enums, etc)\
  generated using `bpftool btf dump file /sys/kernel/btf/vmlinux format c > vmlinux.h`
* ebpf helpers: (`bpf_*.h` - https://github.com/libbpf/libbpf/blob/v0.6.1/src/bpf_tracing.h)
* self-written helpers ...


and what about source file structure?

* `module.c` - main file point, all defines and includes of all functions
  ```c
  //go:build ignore

  #define PID_CHECK_STATE 0
  #define DEBUG_PRINT 1
  #define OPENSSL_VERSION 0x30300000

  #include "openssl.c"
  #include "tracepoint.c"
  #include "kprobe.c"

  static char _license[] SEC("license") = "Dual BSD/GPL";
  ```
  it's used for convenience of building of single module using `bpf2go`
* `tracepoint.c`/`openssl.c`/`kprobe.c` - files with all ebpf entrypoints.
* `openssl-*.c` files are used to store helpers.

## eBPF primer for uprobes/kprobes/tracepoints

just a note: difference between `k(u)probe` and `k(u)retprobe` is a time when
callback is called. `*probe` is called on entering function and `*retprobe` is
called on function exit. Input arguments can be accessed only in `*probe`,
output argement can be accessed only in `*retprobe`.

Naming in `SEC` macro is vital, so "thinkaboutitman"!

### defining eBPF entrypoints and other functions

* for eBPF we're using `SEC()` macro:\
    `SEC("u<ret>probe/<name>")`\
    `SEC("k<ret>probe/<name>")`\
    `SEC("tracepoint/syscalls/sys_<enter/exit>_<name>")`\
    are examples
* for non-ebpf functions we're using `static INLINE_FUNC` macro to embed
  all functions (since ebpf can't make calls to other functions we must inline
  it's code inside [exception are tail call which must be called explicitly])

Examples:

```c
static INLINE_FUNC
direction_t get_direction(u32 fd)
{
    /* ... */
}

SEC("uprobe/SSL_read")
int uprobe_ssl_read(struct pt_regs *ctx)
{
    /* ... */
}

SEC("tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_accept4")
void sys_enter_accept4(struct sys_enter_accept4_ctx *ctx)
{
    /* ... */
}
```

### accessing return variables and call arguments (uprobes/kprobes)

Functions call arguments are accessed using `PT_REGS_PARM<pos>` and `PT_REGS_RC`.
As a convience helpers we're using macroses `BPF_UPROBE(<name>, <args...>)`,
`BPF_URETPROBE(<name>, <rv>)`, and `BPF_KPROBE`/`BPF_KRETPROBE`

Examples:

```c
SEC("uprobe/SSL_read")
int BPF_UPROBE(uprobe_ssl_read, void *ssl, void *buffer, int num)
{
    /* ... */
}

SEC("uretprobe/SSL_read")
int BPF_URETPROBE(uretprobe_ssl_read, int rv)
{
    /* ... */
}
```

### defining tracepoints

Tracepoint can be different types, for example `syscalls`, `oom`, `tcp`, `net`.
But for now we're investigating only `syscalls`.

To understand arguments of tracepoint - we need to cat sys path to investigate
"what's inside":

```c
struct sys_common_ctx {
	u16 common_type;
	u8  common_flags;
	u8  common_preempt_count;
	s32 common_pid;
	s32 __syscall_nr;
};

// cat /sys/kernel/tracing/events/syscalls/sys_enter_connect/format
//
// name: sys_enter_connect
// ID: 2407
// format:
//         field:unsigned short common_type;       		offset:0;       size:2; signed:0;
//         field:unsigned char common_flags;       		offset:2;       size:1; signed:0;
//         field:unsigned char common_preempt_count;    offset:3;       size:1; signed:0;
//         field:int common_pid;              			offset:4;       size:4; signed:1;
//         field:int __syscall_nr; 						offset:8;       size:4; signed:1;
//
//         field:int fd;  							 	offset:16;      size:8; signed:0;
//         field:struct sockaddr * uservaddr;      		offset:24;      size:8; signed:0;
//         field:int addrlen;      						offset:32;      size:8; signed:0;
//
//

struct sys_enter_connect_ctx {
	struct sys_common_ctx ctx;
	u64 				  fd;
	struct sockaddr		 *uservaddr;
	u64 				  uservaddr_len;
};

SEC("tracepoint/<type>/sys_enter_connect")
void sys_enter_connect(struct sys_enter_connect_ctx *ctx)
{
    /* ... */
}

// cat /sys/kernel/tracing/events/syscalls/sys_exit_connect/format
//
// name: sys_exit_connect
// ID: 2406
// format:
//         field:unsigned short common_type;       		offset:0;       size:2; signed:0;
//         field:unsigned char common_flags;       		offset:2;       size:1; signed:0;
//         field:unsigned char common_preempt_count;    offset:3;       size:1; signed:0;
//         field:int common_pid;   						offset:4;       size:4; signed:1;
//         field:int __syscall_nr; 						offset:8;       size:4; signed:1;
//
//         field:long ret; 								offset:16;      size:8; signed:1;

struct sys_exit_connect_ctx {
	struct sys_common_ctx ctx;
	s64 				  ret;
};

SEC("tracepoint/syscalls/sys_exit_connect")
void sys_exit_connect(struct sys_exit_connect_ctx *ctx)
{
    /* ... */
}
```

### defining and accessing maps

Maps are used to store data between eBPF and user space. There are different
types of maps: `hash`, `array`, `percpu_array`, `lru_hash`, `lru_per_cpu_hash`
, `ringbuf` and etc. Each map has it's own properties and limitations, but we
won't discuss it here.

API for maps is simple and consist of three functions:

```
void *bpf_map_lookup_elem(void *map, void *key);
int bpf_map_update_elem(void *map, void *key, void *value, unsigned long long flags);
int bpf_map_delete_elem(void *map, void *key);

// flags:
//     BPF_ANY - if key exists, update it, otherwise create new
//     BPF_NOEXIST - if key exists, return error
//     BPF_EXIST - if key exists, update it, otherwise return error
```

maps can be created using structs with special attributes:

```c
struct {
	__uint(type, BPF_MAP_TYPE_HASH);
	__uint(key_size, sizeof(u64));
	__uint(value_size, sizeof(struct sys_connect_info));
	__uint(max_entries, 4 * 1024);
} sys_connect_info_cache SEC(".maps");

// OR

struct {
	__uint(type, BPF_MAP_TYPE_HASH);
	__type(key_size, u64);
	__type(value_size, struct sys_connect_info);
	__uint(max_entries, 4 * 1024);
} sys_connect_info_cache SEC(".maps");
```

also it's advised to use special "allocator" helpers to create maps:

```c
// define allocator struct and function for sys_connect_info
DEFINE_ALLOCATOR(sys_connect_info, struct sys_connect_info);

{
    struct sys_connect_info *info = sys_connect_info_alloc();
}
```

allocator is basically preallocated memory for map value, so we can use it.
It's implemented using `BPF_MAP_TYPE_PERCPU_ARRAY` map type with fixed len 2.


### ringbuf as special type of map

Ringbuf is a special type of map, which is used to transfer data between
kernel-space and user-space. It's used to store data in a ring buffer
(per-cpu fifo) and read it from user-space.

API for ringbuf is simple and consist of one general function (well, really not
so simple, more methods, but we're using only one):

```c
int bpf_ringbuf_output(void *ringbuf, void *data, u64 size, u64 flags);
```

to define ringbuf we're using special struct with attributes:

```c
struct {
    __uint(type, BPF_MAP_TYPE_RINGBUF);
    __uint(max_entries, 1024);
} ringbuf SEC(".maps");
```

Re additional parameters for initialization as documentation stated: "Key and
value sizes are enforced to be zero. max_entries is used to specify the size
of ring buffer and has to be a power of 2 value."

### using and accessing from go code

To access eBPF from go code we're using `cilium/ebpf` library. It's a wrapper
around `libbpf` and `bpf` kernel module. It's used to load and attach eBPF
programs, maps, and other objects. Also `bpftool` is used to compile ebpf and
generate bpf wrappers for go code.

To load eBPF program we're using combination of `load<ModuleName>` and
`load<ModuleName>Objects` functions. Then we're mapping eBPF program to their
respective spec records and load them one-by-one.

{{< code go >}}

func (a *EbpfAgent) Init(ctx context.Context) error {
    /* ... */

    collectionSpec, err := loadModule()
	if err != nil {
		return throw.W(err, "failed to load module")
	}
	a.spec = collectionSpec

	err = loadModuleObjects(&a.objects, &ebpf.CollectionOptions{
		Maps: ebpf.MapOptions{},
		Programs: ebpf.ProgramOptions{
			LogLevel: 2,       // Enable verifier logs
			LogSize:  1 << 26, // Set log size to 1MB

		},
		MapReplacements: nil,
	})
	switch vError := findVerifierError(err); {
	case err == nil:
	case vError != nil:
		log.Error("failed to load module objects: verifier error cause by")
		log.Error("verifier error caused by: ", vError.Cause.Error())

		for _, line := range vError.Log {
			log.Error(line)
		}
		fallthrough
	default:
		return throw.W(err, "failed to load module objects")
	}

	if err := a.fillCollectionSpec(); err != nil {
		return throw.W(err, "failed to fill collection spec")
	}

    /* ... */
}

func (a *EbpfAgent) fillCollectionSpec() error {
	moduleProgramsV := reflect.ValueOf(a.objects.modulePrograms)
	moduleProgramsT := moduleProgramsV.Type()

	for i := 0; i < moduleProgramsV.NumField(); i++ {
		fieldV := moduleProgramsV.Field(i)
		fieldT := moduleProgramsT.Field(i)

		name := fieldT.Tag.Get("ebpf")

		if !fieldV.CanInterface() {
			continue
		}

		if fieldV.IsNil() {
			continue
		}

		prog := fieldV.Interface().(*ebpf.Program)
		a.spec.Programs[name].AttachTarget = prog
	}

	return nil
}


func (a *EbpfAgent) GlobalAttach(ctx context.Context) error {
	for _, prog := range a.spec.Programs {
		var (
			linkI link.Link
			err   error
		)

		switch symbolExpectedName := prog.SectionName; {
		case strings.HasPrefix(symbolExpectedName, "kprobe/"):
			symbolName := symbolExpectedName[len("kprobe/"):]
			linkI, err = link.Kprobe(symbolName, prog.AttachTarget, nil)
		case strings.HasPrefix(symbolExpectedName, "kretprobe/"):
			symbolName := symbolExpectedName[len("kretprobe/"):]
			linkI, err = link.Kretprobe(symbolName, prog.AttachTarget, nil)
		case strings.HasPrefix(symbolExpectedName, "tracepoint"):
			tpComponents := strings.Split(symbolExpectedName, "/")
			if len(tpComponents) != 3 {
				// TODO: parse that situation later
				continue
			}

			symbolExpectedName = tpComponents[2]
			linkI, err = link.Tracepoint(tpComponents[1], symbolExpectedName, prog.AttachTarget, nil)
		default:
			continue
		}

		if err != nil {
			continue
		}

		a.globalLinks = append(a.globalLinks, linkI)
	}

	return nil
}

func (a *EbpfAgent) LocalAttach(ctx context.Context, inode uint64, opensslPath string) error {
	// we're already listening, TODO: process it with an error
	if _, ok := a.localLinks[inode]; ok {
		return nil
	}

	lib, err := link.OpenExecutable(opensslPath)
	if err != nil {
		return throw.W(err, "failed to open shared library")
	}

	symbolNames, err := FindSoSymbolNames(opensslPath)
	if err != nil {
		return throw.W(err, "failed to find symbols")
	}

	var links []link.Link

	for _, prog := range a.spec.Programs {
		symbolExpectedName := prog.SectionName
		onReturn := false

		switch {
		case strings.HasPrefix(symbolExpectedName, "uprobe/"):
			symbolExpectedName = symbolExpectedName[len("uprobe/"):]
		case strings.HasPrefix(symbolExpectedName, "uretprobe/"):
			symbolExpectedName = symbolExpectedName[len("uretprobe/"):]
			onReturn = true
		default:
			continue
		}

		if !slices.Contains(symbolNames, symbolExpectedName) {
			continue
		}

		var linkI link.Link
		if onReturn {
			fmt.Println("attaching uprobe: ", symbolExpectedName)
			linkI, err = lib.Uretprobe(symbolExpectedName, prog.AttachTarget, nil)
		} else {
			fmt.Println("attaching uretprobe: ", symbolExpectedName)
			linkI, err = lib.Uprobe(symbolExpectedName, prog.AttachTarget, nil)
		}

		if err != nil {
			return throw.W(err, "failed to attach")
		}

		links = append(links, linkI)
	}

	a.localLinks[inode] = links

	return nil
}

{{< /code >}}

There's a lot of code, but it's basically load, initialize, and attach eBPF
programs to kernel functions. Also we're using `link` package to attach eBPF
programs to shared libraries.

**No magic, just a lot of code to make it work.**

One more thing - we're using `RemoveMemlock` to remove memory lock from
`/proc/sys/vm/max_map_count` to allow eBPF to work properly.

```go

func init() {
	// TODO: This function exists as a convenience and should only be used when
	//       permanently raising RLIMIT_MEMLOCK to infinite is appropriate. Consider
	//       invoking prlimit(2) directly with a more reasonable limit if desired.
	//
	// Requires CAP_SYS_RESOURCE on kernels < 5.11.
	if err := rlimit.RemoveMemlock(); err != nil {
		panic(throw.W(err, "failed to remove memlock rlimit"))
	}
}
```

Also for reading data from ringbuf we're using `ReadRingBuffer` function:

```go

func (a *EbpfAgent) Init(ctx context.Context) error {
    /* ... */

	rbuf, err := ringbuf.NewReader(a.objects.moduleMaps.SslCallOutput)
	if err != nil {
		return throw.W(err, "failed to create ringbuf reader")
	}

    /* ... */
}

func (a *EbpfAgent) ReadRingBuffer(ctx context.Context) error {
	record, err := a.rbuf.Read()
	switch {
	case errors.Is(err, ringbuf.ErrClosed):
		return err
	case err != nil:
		return throw.W(err, "failed to read ringbuf record")
	case len(record.RawSample) < 1:
		return nil
	}

	fmt.Println("processing record with size: ", len(record.RawSample), "and type ", record.RawSample[0])

    /* ... */
}
```

## eBPF for SSL packet interception flow

### common

* `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_accept4` or `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_connect`\
  to get type of connection: s2c or c2s.

### read

* uprobe `SSL_read`/`SSL_read_ex`/`SSL_read_early` saves info to
  `ssl_call_context` about intermediate buffers to be processed later.
* `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_recvfrom` and `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_read`
  to get fd we are working with
* `kprobe_tcp_recvmsg` to get src/dst hosts/ports
* uretprobe `SSL_read`/`SSL_read_ex`/`SSL_read_early` to get return value and
  merge all data together (fd/src+dst host+port/SSL data) and send it to
  `ssl_call_output` ringbuf.

### write

* uprobe `SSL_write`/`SSL_write_ex`/`SSL_write_early` saves info to
  `ssl_call_context` about intermediate buffers to be processed later.
* `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_sendto` and `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_write`
  to get fd we are working with
* `kprobe_tcp_sendmsg` to get src/dst hosts/ports
* uretprobe `SSL_write`/`SSL_write_ex`/`SSL_write_early` to get return value and
  merge all data together (fd/src+dst host+port/SSL data) and send it to
  `ssl_call_output` ringbuf.


### userspace



## links

* [learning eBPF book](https://cilium.isovalent.com/hubfs/Learning-eBPF%20-%20Full%20book.pdf)
* [golang ebpf lib](https://github.com/cilium/ebpf)
* [features by kernel versions](https://github.com/iovisor/bcc/blob/master/docs/kernel-versions.md)
* https://docs.kernel.org/6.6/bpf/index.html
* https://prototype-kernel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bpf/index.html
